Well, can I talk? Sure. OK. So I really enjoyed
visiting in their home.
I remember when I first met Hannah, they adopted
her after they came here. And so there she was. And
she's a real sweet person.
In fact, At that occasion, it also happened that
Harlan's dissertation advisors, Cecilia
Payne-Gaposchkin and Sergei, were visiting the
family at that time. Oh, that must have been
interesting. That was very interesting, because
Sergei was telling all about his escape across the
Black Sea after the revolution, and landing in
Turkey. He had some strange ideas about Turkish
language, which I knew were wrong, but I let him
know. persistent as Polly, so to speak.
Do you think, I think we'll probably all agree that
Harlan is not what the general public expects from
an observatory director in appearance, right? Do
you think that in Texas, though, he's considered
now? Oh, well, he fit into the Texas lifestyle
quite easily, apparently.
If you just take a look at all the people in Texas who
seem to have had a high regard for Harlan, He knew
how to get along with people, and he knew how to get
them interested in astronomy, get them
interested in what the observatory was doing. He
was really great in that regard.
Let me ask you first a question pertaining to you.
you meet people and tell them what you do, what do
they think? I mean, do they think astronomers are
sponging off productive elements, or do they
think it's a neat job? I have very seldom had a
reaction such as you describe. Usually it's, oh,
how interesting. And when I tell them about
Hubble, they say, oh, well, what went wrong? Or,
oh, yeah. But there's clearly a lot of interest in
astronomy as astronomy. You know, people I've
talked to on the planes, I'll get a picture or an
article, they'll send me in the mail, you know,
some insurance executive or what have you will
say, this I thought you'd be interested in this.
Because of course I give them my card, because
that's how one does it, right? Exchange cards
here, Ron?
Okay. That's the cheapest form of advertisement
that there is. Occasionally
there'll be somebody who couldn't care less, but
that's not the usual reaction. I ask that because
one time I was trapped on a plane with Shirley
MacLaine's advance lady. Oh dear. That was a
difficult four hours.
Well, you know, it's the sort of thing that I'm not
going to justify astronomy on the basis of all the
things that it does for mankind. It satisfies
people's curiosity, and I think that's really its
justification. Now, I've been asking this about
planetary astronomy, but it applies in two other
ways. One is the University of Texas Astronomy
Department, and astronomers generally in this
country There's no question that McDonald's and
UT Austin have sold themselves well in this state.
And, well, really, through Stardate, that's what
people in Boston think of. They never heard. I
don't know if UT has a medical school or a law school
or anything. Probably don't care that it has a
football team, but they know Stardate. But do you
think American astronomers have sold as well as
they have in Texas? As well as? What should they be
doing? I don't know. I mean, this is personal
opinion stuff, but I want to lighten up the book
with some stuff. I really don't know how to answer
that question. I've been asking everyone, this is
their one chance, what do you think is the most
important work you've done so far?
They're going to carve something on your
tombstone.
Well, I... Keeping the astrometry team going
through all the thick and thin of this problems
that the telescope has had from the very
beginning, I think, has been important. And
finally starting to get some results. It's been
the hardest thing that I've ever done, to put it
that way. In terms of ultimate value to science,
it's hard to say because we've still have our
results to get. If we discover a planet around some
star, that would be very interesting. That's a
roll
of the dice kind of situation. Some of my earlier
stuff,
well, I've done some interesting work in
statistics in connection with the space
telescope work, in fact. We have a very
interesting computer program, which we
developed, that really makes doing least squares
problems extremely easy. Oh, well that sounds
like a great boom to mankind. And it's got, there
have been a lot of people, you know, that have been
using it, and with profit. You can imagine, it's
got, I mean, you can apply it to all sorts of things.
So I'm kind of proud of that work. And
the other things that have been sort of a
cumulative thing, I don't know if there's any
particular one paper that I could point to in some
of my work on celestial mechanics. But taken
together, I think that there's a lot of
interesting research there. What do you think is
going to happen to planetary astronomy,
celestial mechanics, that sort of stuff now that
budgets have leveled off or are decreasing? Well,
celestial mechanics doesn't need a whole lot of
money. in the sense that you need access to a
computer primarily. Most of the interesting
research is being done by massaging, you know,
running computer programs these days. Well, I
mean, I'm talking particularly here about are you
still encouraging graduate students to enter the
field or not? I encourage people to enter fields
that they have interest in. I don't I've never, you
know, either encouraged or discouraged a student
from going into a particular area of astronomy or
into astronomy itself based on whether or not
they'll find a job at the end of it. I think that if
you're good, there'll be a job. And the only way to
find out if you're good is to try it and see.
So I've had Several graduate students, they all
have jobs at the moment. Gene Bird and Bob
Harrington was my student also. I was going to say,
I didn't mention this, but my grandfather had been
a doctor in China from 1900 to Now there's some
conflict about this, whether it was 1911 or 1913
that he came back. My father always said 1913, but
his older sister, who's still alive, Adelaide,
said that it was 1911. So probably it was 1911.
Interesting years in China. Right. This was just
after the Boxer Revolution and just up until the
1911 revolution. Anyhow, because of that China
connection, and also because of the connection
with my mother's roommate in college who had also
grown up, been born and grown up in China, and three
of my aunts born and grown up in China, or at least
partly grown up in China, and going to my
grandfather's house and seeing all these
wonderful Chinese chinoiserie and stuff like
that that he brought back with him. I have always
been interested in China, studied Chinese when I
was in college, studied it some more when I got
here. And so that was yet another connection with
Joan and Harlem, which I always was very fond of.
Now, I know Harlan took a trip, at least, well, I
remember the first one he took to China's
Jonestown back there. Okay. Harlan went to China
in, was it 77 or 78? That was the first trip of all the
official astronomers. Schwarzschild went on the
trip. All these other people went on the trip.
Harlan was on that trip. Harlan and Joan went to
China. And Joan will have to tell you when, but they
did go to China, I think twice. Once in the
mid-'80s. Because I remember him showing us
pictures of this long, red colonnade garden, what
do you call it? Gallery or something. And Joan used
to play there as a kid.
But they went there a second time, and I think it was
like mid-'80s. And then they went there. in 1980.
No, it would be 1990. They didn't go in 1989. They'd
been thinking of going, but then Tiananmen
happened. So I think they went the following year.
That last trip, they climbed Tai Shan, or Mount
Tai. which is a famous, one of the three famous
sacred mountains in China. Is that the one where
the two provinces are, east of the mountain and
west of the mountain, you know, Shantan and
Shaanxi? It could be. It could be. I'm not certain
about that. Joan would know. I have not been to
Taishan. But it is, it's a famous pilgrimage site.
And, of course, during, for a long time people
weren't going to it because, you know, one wasn't
supposed to practice religion. Now that they've
eased up on certain practices of religion,
although China is still, you know, a totalitarian
country, and one has to watch what one says.
Nevertheless, people now do go in great numbers to
that place. They climbed the mountain, as I
understand, while they were there. So she has been
there. She has been to her childhood home in China,
I think it's Changsha.
I think Changsha is where it was, but Joan will tell
you about that. And in fact, I visited my
grandfather's home in Shanghai when I was there
the last time. Because, again, this is one of these
funny things. I was at friends' meeting one day.
Joan Smith was there. After the rise of meeting,
Joan was talking with an elderly lady And she, I
went over and it turned out they were talking about
China. And it turned out that this lady had been
born in Shanghai. And I said, oh, well, you know,
three of my aunts were born in Shanghai. And she
said, oh, well, who were they? And I said, well, I
don't think you probably know them. Oh, well, I
didn't know at that time how well connected all
these old China people were. I said, well,
they're, you know, Jeffries was the name. Oh, she
said, I grew up in the Jeffries house. And she had in
fact, her father had in fact taken my
grandfather's job after my grandfather came back
from China for health reasons. And so she knew
where the house was. She had been to that house. She
sent me detailed instructions on how to find it.
Her name was Alice Walker. She lives in Hawaii or
did it the last time I wrote her. And so she and
enabled me to find this house, which is now a school
in the old hospital compound. There's too many
coincidences in this world. Isn't it? It's
amazing. Let me tell you a story that doesn't have
anything to do with China, but it has to.